applications: Add Zigbee weather station app (#6992)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/zigbee_weather_station/README.rst

* ``release`` -- Release version of the application - can be used to enable only the necessary application functionalities to optimize its performance.

.. note::
    `Selecting a build type`_ is optional.
    The ``debug`` build type is used by default if no build type is explicitly selected.

Logging in the ``debug`` build type
===================================

In the ``debug`` build type, the application also uses serial console over USB for logging.
Besides initialization logs, the following sets of measurement-related data are logged after measurements update:

* Values measured by sensor.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: console

     [00:20:06.458,770] <inf> app: Sensor     T: 26.760000 [*C] P: 96.723000 [kPa] H: 23.178000 [%]

* Values set as corresponding ZCL attributes (transformed according to specification).
  For example:

  .. code-block:: console

     [00:20:06.458,801] <inf> app: Attributes T:      2676      P:       967       H:      2317

OTA and DFU
===========

.. note::
   :ref:`lib_zigbee_fota` is not yet supported for this application.

>    See the limitation section on the library page.

Author: I wanted to add such link but I was not able to do so. I'm referring to Limitation section of the Zigbee FOTA article reference in line 74. Unfortunately this section does not have appropriate marker to make a reference to - or at least I don't know how to add such reference.  Do you know how?

>    See the limitation section on the library page.

Author: Link will be added, thank you for your assistance.

    .. note::
       Thingy:53 allows to control RGB components of its single LED independently.
       This means that the listed color components can overlap, creating additional color effects.
       For example, **LED (LD1)** can indicate that the device is connected to a Zigbee network in blue, but if the device goes into the Identify mode at the same time, the flashing to indicate this will be purple, not red.

Power switch (SW1):
    Used for switching Thingy:53 on and off.

Button (SW3):
    Used to start and cancel the Identify mode.
    Additionally, pressing the button indicates user input, which allows a Sleepy End Device to start network rejoin procedure if it was stopped (for example, after timeout).

USB port:
    Used for getting logs from the device.
    It is enabled only for the debug configuration of the application.
    See the `Selecting a build type`_ section to learn how to select the debug configuration.

Configuration
*************

|config|

Following options in :file:`Kconfig` can be adjusted:

* ``FIRST_WEATHER_CHECK_DELAY_SECONDS`` - delay from application initialization to first sensor data readout, in seconds; default value: ``5``

> * ``WEATHER_CHECK_PERIOD_SECONDS`` - period of cyclic sensor readouts after the first readout, in seconds; default value: ``60``

Author: It should not harm - I will change to double dashes.

> * ``WEATHER_CHECK_PERIOD_SECONDS`` - period of cyclic sensor readouts after the first readout, in seconds; default value: ``60``

Author: Changed manually.

> The following options in :file:`Kconfig` can be adjusted:
> 
> * ``FIRST_WEATHER_CHECK_DELAY_SECONDS`` - delay from application initialization to first sensor data readout, in seconds; default value: ``5``
> 
> * ``WEATHER_CHECK_PERIOD_SECONDS`` - period of cyclic sensor readouts after the first readout, in seconds; default value: ``60``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _zigbee_weather_station_app_configuration_readout:

Readout configuration options
=============================

The following Kconfig option values can be set to custom values:

* :kconfig:`CONFIG_FIRST_WEATHER_CHECK_DELAY_SECONDS` - This option defines the delay from the moment of the application initialization to the first sensor data readout.
  The value is provided in seconds, with the default value set to ``5``.

* :kconfig:`WEATHER_CHECK_PERIOD_SECONDS` - This option defines the period of cyclic sensor readouts after the first readout.
  The value is provided in seconds, with the default value set to ``60``.
```
This needs to be a separate section, as for other applications or samples.

Author: For some reason I cannot apply this change in github gui like for other changes... I will try adding it manually

Author: Done manually.

      The coordinator device has the short address ``0x0000`` and the long address ``f4ce3655fc08bf6b``.
      The coordinator's endpoint number is ``64``.
    * Endpoint number ``42`` is used for aggregating temperature (``0x0402``), pressure (``0x0403``) and relative humidity (``0x0405``) clusters.
    * The provided measurement data values depend on Thingy:53 surrounding conditions.

After programming the application, perform the following steps to test the Zigbee weather station application on the Thingy:53 device:

1. If you want to capture packets, install `nRF Sniffer for 802.15.4`_ and `configure Wireshark for use with Zigbee <Configuring Wireshark for Zigbee>`_.
#. |connect_generic|
   The connection is needed for gathering logs from the Zigbee weather station application.
   This is an optional ``debug`` build type step.
#. Turn on the :ref:`Zigbee shell <zigbee_shell_sample>` sample programmed as the network coordinator to one of the compatible development kits.
   See Testing section of the sample to learn how to set it up to work as coordinator.
   Once turned on, the network coordinator forms the network and opens it for other devices to join for 180 seconds.

> #. Turn on Thingy:53.

Reviewer: According to the marketing, Thingy:53 can be used on its own after the first full mention (`the Nordic Thingy:53`): https://projecttools.nordicsemi.no/confluence/display/MAR/Product+names

So here it works OK, but yes, we can use the longer version for consistency.

```suggestion
#. Turn on the Thingy:53 device.
```

      [00:00:02.035,064] <inf> zigbee_app_utils: Started network rejoin procedure.
      [00:00:05.637,512] <inf> zigbee_app_utils: Joined network successfully (Extended PAN ID: f4ce3655fc08bf6b, PAN ID: 0xbf9e)

   .. note::
      As timestamps in this snippet indicate, these logs are likely to appear before the periodic sensor or attribute logs.

#. Read the weather attributes from the development kit programmed with the Zigbee shell sample (the network coordinator):

   a. Run the following command to read the temperature attribute:

      .. code-block:: console

         uart:~$ zcl attr read 0x1ca9 42 0x0402 0x0104 0x0000

      In this command:

      * ``0x1ca9`` is the short network address of Thingy:53.
      * ``42`` is the endpoint number for aggregating the clusters.
      * ``0x0402`` is the temperature cluster ID.
      * ``0x0104`` is the Zigbee Home Automation profile ID.
      * ``0x0000`` is the short network address of the coordinator device.

      The output will be similar to the following one:

      .. code-block:: console

         ID: 0 Type: 29 Value: 2394

      Here, the value ``2394`` means 23.94 degrees Celsius.

>       In Wireshark, the corresponding response frame for this output looks like follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      In Wireshark, the corresponding response frame for this output looks like as follows:
```

      .. code-block::

         ZigBee HA	2298	4756.825525	0x1ca9	0x0000	0x1ca9	0x0000	f4:ce:36:23:d7:4e:77:1d	f4:ce:36:55:fc:08:bf:6b		0xbf9e	ZCL: Read Attributes Response, Seq: 0

         Frame 2298: 68 bytes on wire (544 bits), 68 bytes captured (544 bits)
         IEEE 802.15.4 Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
         ZigBee Network Layer Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
         ZigBee Application Support Layer Data, Dst Endpt: 64, Src Endpt: 42
         ZigBee Cluster Library Frame, Command: Read Attributes Response, Seq: 0
            Frame Control Field: Profile-wide (0x18)
            Sequence Number: 0
            Command: Read Attributes Response (0x01)
            Status Record
               Attribute: Measured Value (0x0000)
               Status: Success (0x00)
               Data Type: 16-Bit Signed Integer (0x29)
               Measured Value: 23.94 [°C]

   #. Run the following command to read the pressure attribute:

      .. code-block:: console

         uart:~$ zcl attr read 0x1ca9 42 0x0403 0x0104 0x0000

>       Compared with the previous command, ``0x0403`` in this command stands for the pressure cluster ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Compared with the previous command, ``0x0403`` in this command represents for the pressure cluster ID.
```

Reviewer 2: If you agree with this suggestion, then please apply to lines 354, 407, and 414 as well.

      The output will be similar to the following one:

      .. code-block:: console

         ID: 0 Type: 29 Value: 984

      Here, the value ``984`` means 98.4 kPa.

>       In Wireshark, the corresponding response frame for this output looks like follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      In Wireshark, the corresponding response frame for this output looks like as follows:
```

         Frame 2608: 68 bytes on wire (544 bits), 68 bytes captured (544 bits)
         IEEE 802.15.4 Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
         ZigBee Network Layer Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
         ZigBee Application Support Layer Data, Dst Endpt: 64, Src Endpt: 42
         ZigBee Cluster Library Frame, Command: Read Attributes Response, Seq: 1
            Frame Control Field: Profile-wide (0x18)
            Sequence Number: 1
            Command: Read Attributes Response (0x01)
            Status Record
               Attribute: Measured Value (0x0000)
               Status: Success (0x00)
               Data Type: 16-Bit Signed Integer (0x29)
               Measured Value: 98.4 [kPa]

   #. Run the following command to read the relative humidity attribute:

      .. code-block:: console

         uart:~$ zcl attr read 0x1ca9 42 0x0405 0x0104 0x0000

      Compared with the previous command, ``0x0405`` in this command stands for the relative humidity cluster ID.
      The output will be similar to the following one:

      .. code-block:: console

         ID: 0 Type: 21 Value: 3293

      Here, the value ``3293`` means 32.93%.

>       In Wireshark, the corresponding response frame for this output looks like follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      In Wireshark, the corresponding response frame for this output looks like as follows:
```

        .. code-block:: console

           uart:~$ zdo bind on f4ce3623d74e771d 42 f4ce3655fc08bf6b 64 0x0402 0x1ca9

        In this command:

        * ``f4ce3623d74e771d`` is the long network address of Thingy:53.
        * ``42`` is the endpoint number for aggregating the clusters.
        * ``f4ce3655fc08bf6b`` is the long network address of the network coordinator device.
        * ``64`` is the endpoint number of the network coordinator device.
        * ``0x0402`` is the temperature cluster ID.
        * ``0x1ca9``  is the short network address of Thingy:53.

      * Pressure cluster binding:

        .. code-block:: console

           uart:~$ zdo bind on f4ce3623d74e771d 42 f4ce3655fc08bf6b 64 0x0403 0x1ca9

        Compared with the previous command, ``0x0403`` in this command stands for the pressure cluster ID.
      * Relative humidity cluster binding:

        .. code-block:: console

           uart:~$ zdo bind on f4ce3623d74e771d 42 f4ce3655fc08bf6b 64 0x0405 0x1ca9

        Compared with the previous command, ``0x0405`` in this command stands for the relative humidity cluster ID.

   #. Observe periodic reports in Wireshark for the respective clusters:

>       * Temperature cluster periodic report will look like follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * Temperature cluster periodic report will look like as follows:
```

         .. code-block::

            ZigBee HA	3882	7705.599377	0x1ca9	0x0000	0x1ca9	0x0000	f4:ce:36:23:d7:4e:77:1d	f4:ce:36:55:fc:08:bf:6b		0xbf9e	ZCL: Report Attributes, Seq: 128

            Frame 3882: 67 bytes on wire (536 bits), 67 bytes captured (536 bits)
            IEEE 802.15.4 Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
            ZigBee Network Layer Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
            ZigBee Application Support Layer Data, Dst Endpt: 64, Src Endpt: 42
            ZigBee Cluster Library Frame, Command: Report Attributes, Seq: 128
               Frame Control Field: Profile-wide (0x08)
               Sequence Number: 128
               Command: Report Attributes (0x0a)
               Attribute Field
                  Attribute: Measured Value (0x0000)
                  Data Type: 16-Bit Signed Integer (0x29)
                  Measured Value: 24.26 [°C]

>       * Pressure cluster periodic report will look like follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * Pressure cluster periodic report will look like as follows:
```

         .. code-block::

            ZigBee HA	3888	7705.727682	0x1ca9	0x0000	0x1ca9	0x0000	f4:ce:36:23:d7:4e:77:1d	f4:ce:36:55:fc:08:bf:6b		0xbf9e	ZCL: Report Attributes, Seq: 129

            Frame 3888: 67 bytes on wire (536 bits), 67 bytes captured (536 bits)
            IEEE 802.15.4 Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
            ZigBee Network Layer Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
            ZigBee Application Support Layer Data, Dst Endpt: 64, Src Endpt: 42
            ZigBee Cluster Library Frame, Command: Report Attributes, Seq: 129
               Frame Control Field: Profile-wide (0x08)
               Sequence Number: 129
               Command: Report Attributes (0x0a)
               Attribute Field
                  Attribute: Measured Value (0x0000)
                  Data Type: 16-Bit Signed Integer (0x29)
                  Measured Value: 98.4 [kPa]

>       * Relative humidity cluster periodic report will look like follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * Relative humidity cluster periodic report will look like as follows:
```

* ``release`` -- Release version of the application - can be used to enable only the necessary application functionalities to optimize its performance.

.. note::
    `Selecting a build type`_ is optional.
    The ``debug`` build type is used by default if no build type is explicitly selected.

Logging in the ``debug`` build type
===================================

In the ``debug`` build type, the application also uses serial console over USB for logging.
Besides initialization logs, the following sets of measurement-related data are logged after measurements update:

* Values measured by sensor.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: console

     [00:20:06.458,770] <inf> app: Sensor     T: 26.760000 [*C] P: 96.723000 [kPa] H: 23.178000 [%]

* Values set as corresponding ZCL attributes (transformed according to specification).
  For example:

  .. code-block:: console

     [00:20:06.458,801] <inf> app: Attributes T:      2676      P:       967       H:      2317

OTA and DFU
===========

.. note::
   :ref:`lib_zigbee_fota` is not yet supported for this application.

>    See the :ref:`Limitations <lib_zigbee_fota_limitations>` section on the library page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   See the :ref:`Limitations <lib_zigbee_fota_limitations>` section on the Zigbee FOTA library page.
```

Author: Done

.. parsed-literal::
   :class: highlight

   west build -b thingy53_nrf5340_cpuapp -d build_thingy53_nrf5340_cpuapp -- -DCONF_FILE=prj_release.conf

The ``build_thingy53_nrf5340_cpuapp`` parameter specifies the output directory for the build files.

.. note::
   If the selected board does not support the selected build type, the build is interrupted.
   For example, if the ``shell`` build type is not supported by the selected board, the following notification appears:

   .. code-block:: console

      File not found: ./ncs/nrf/applications/zigbee_weather_station/configuration/thingy53_nrf5340_cpuapp/prj_shell.conf

Testing
=======

Preliminary testing information
    * The testing procedure assumes you are using the ``debug`` :ref:`build type <zigbee_weather_station_app_build_types>`, as it provides more feedback with **LED (LD1)** and logs through the USB console.
      The steps related to the ``debug`` build type are marked as "Optional ``debug`` build type step".
      These steps are not required when using the ``release`` build type.

>     * Wireshark with :ref:`ug_zigbee_tools_sniffer` is used for packet capturing.
>       This is an optional setup, but Wireshark response frame examples are provided in the Testing steps as reference.

Reviewer: This can actually be removed, and step 1 of the testing procedure can be reworked -- see comment to line 229.
```suggestion
```

Author: Done

>     * In the examples provided in the Testing section, Thingy:53 has the short network address ``0x1ca9`` and the long network address ``f4ce3623d74e771d``.
>       The coordinator device has the short address ``0x0000`` and the long address ``f4ce3655fc08bf6b``.
>       The coordinator's endpoint number is ``64``.
>     * Endpoint number ``42`` is used for aggregating temperature (``0x0402``), pressure (``0x0403``) and relative humidity (``0x0405``) clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think this might be actually removed, as it is explained next to the examples. @kittydepa , what do you think?

Author: Done

    * The provided measurement data values depend on the Thingy:53 device's surrounding conditions.

After programming the application, perform the following steps to test the Zigbee weather station application on the Thingy:53 device:

> 1. If you want to capture packets, install `nRF Sniffer for 802.15.4`_ and `configure Wireshark for use with Zigbee <Configuring Wireshark for Zigbee>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you want to capture packets with Wireshark, install `nRF Sniffer for 802.15.4`_ and `configure Wireshark for use with Zigbee <Configuring Wireshark for Zigbee>`_.
   This is an optional step.
   However, Wireshark response frame examples are provided below for reference.
```

Author: Done

#. |connect_generic|
   The connection is needed for gathering logs from the Zigbee weather station application.
   This is an optional ``debug`` build type step.
#. Turn on the :ref:`Zigbee shell <zigbee_shell_sample>` sample programmed as the network coordinator to one of the compatible development kits.
   See the Testing section of the sample to learn how to set it up to work as a coordinator.
   Once turned on, the network coordinator forms the network and opens it for other devices to join for 180 seconds.
#. Turn on the Thingy:53 device.
   The application tries to join the Zigbee network automatically.
#. |connect_terminal_generic|
   When the connection is established, initialization logs start to appear in the console.
   They can look like the following:

   .. code-block:: console

      [00:00:02.027,435] <inf> app: Starting...
      [00:00:02.027,526] <inf> app: Initializing sensor...
      [00:00:02.027,526] <inf> app: Initializing sensor...OK
      [00:00:02.027,862] <inf> app: Starting...OK

   After around 5 seconds after the initialization, periodic sensor readouts and attribute setting logs start to appear in the console.

>    They can look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   They will look similar to the following one:
```

Author: Done

         Frame 2608: 68 bytes on wire (544 bits), 68 bytes captured (544 bits)
         IEEE 802.15.4 Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
         ZigBee Network Layer Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
         ZigBee Application Support Layer Data, Dst Endpt: 64, Src Endpt: 42
         ZigBee Cluster Library Frame, Command: Read Attributes Response, Seq: 1
            Frame Control Field: Profile-wide (0x18)
            Sequence Number: 1
            Command: Read Attributes Response (0x01)
            Status Record
               Attribute: Measured Value (0x0000)
               Status: Success (0x00)
               Data Type: 16-Bit Signed Integer (0x29)
               Measured Value: 98.4 [kPa]

   #. Run the following command to read the relative humidity attribute:

      .. code-block:: console

         uart:~$ zcl attr read 0x1ca9 42 0x0405 0x0104 0x0000

      Compared with the previous command, ``0x0405`` in this command stands for the relative humidity cluster ID.
      The output will be similar to the following one:

      .. code-block:: console

         ID: 0 Type: 21 Value: 3293

>       Here, the value ``3293`` means 32.93%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Here, the value ``3293`` means a humidity reading of 32.93%.
```

Author: Done

                  Data Type: 16-Bit Signed Integer (0x29)
                  Measured Value: 98.4 [kPa]

      * Relative humidity cluster periodic report will look like as follows:

         .. code-block::

            ZigBee HA	3894	7705.856763	0x1ca9	0x0000	0x1ca9	0x0000	f4:ce:36:23:d7:4e:77:1d	f4:ce:36:55:fc:08:bf:6b		0xbf9e	ZCL: Report Attributes, Seq: 130

            Frame 3894: 67 bytes on wire (536 bits), 67 bytes captured (536 bits)
            IEEE 802.15.4 Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
            ZigBee Network Layer Data, Dst: 0x0000, Src: 0x1ca9
            ZigBee Application Support Layer Data, Dst Endpt: 64, Src Endpt: 42
            ZigBee Cluster Library Frame, Command: Report Attributes, Seq: 130
               Frame Control Field: Profile-wide (0x08)
               Sequence Number: 130
               Command: Report Attributes (0x0a)
               Attribute Field
                  Attribute: Measured Value (0x0000)
                  Data Type: 16-Bit Unsigned Integer (0x21)
                  Measured Value: 32.99 [%]

.. WIP: PLACEHOLDER

   .. _zigbee_weather_station_app_dfu:

   Updating the device firmware
   ============================

>    * Placeholder for application FOTA procedure

Reviewer: Remove this line.

Author: Which one? Four lines are shown.

Author: Thanks for clarification; done.

>       To update the device firmware, complete the steps listed for the selected method in the :doc:`matter:nrfconnect_examples_software_update` tutorial in the Matter documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      To update the device firmware, complete the following steps;
```
Let's remove the Matter refs even from placeholder content.

Author: Done
